# simrproject
Hidden Diagnostic Signals: A Machine Learning Approach to Major Depressive Disorder Prediction using Topic-Restricted Text Data

A Deep Learning Query: Predicting MDD

Abstract:
Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), commonly known as clinical depression, is characterized as a mood disorder involving persistent sadness that may cause changes in behavior and daily physical functions. Though significant strides have been taken to increase long-term treatment options, a major gap exists in the diagnosis of the disorder, with over two thirds of cases left undiagnosed. Social Media may provide an avenue to detect such cases, given that there are billions of users worldwide. We hypothesize that Reddit contains a diagnostic signal in its text data that can be used for a binary classification task to predict depression. Our text corpus was curated from topic-restricted Reddit threads and preprocessed using the NLTK library. We then utilized word embeddings to extract features from the data to train our deep neural network models. We also trained an SVM model on our text corpus with Tf-idf vectors. The SVM outperformed all the models with an accuracy of 91.6% and an impressive AUC of 0.969 demonstrating high performance. Furthermore, frequency word analysis revealed the surprising importance of personal pronouns in distinguishing classes. Our results support our hypothesis as these models were able to accurately distinguish between Reddit users with depression and those from our control data. We hope to better optimize our models to design a social media tool allowing for early diagnosis of MDD to offer users with real-time mental health resources and timely patient-provider intervention.
